Welcome everybody. My name is David and I have the pleasure of introducing Stefan Bortsmeyer
who will be speaking next on observations of a DNS sec incident, the Russian TLD.
Hello everyone. I work for AFNIC which is a data file domain name registry so I know one or two things about the DNS.
Time to see first the problem. So the lightning talk appeared quite recently in the schedule because everything happened on Tuesday this week.
So many users noticed a problem. A lot of sites services under the .ru TLD. TLD is top level domain. .ru is for Russia.
And there were many problems. Many people reported this as I cannot reach a young dex or I cannot reach V-contact or other service.
But actually it was a very general problem with .ru. Everything with the name .ru was down, it seemed.
But some people said, okay, it still works or it works for me. You know that on the internet because the internet as a previous speaker said,
the world is not coherent. On the internet it's perfectly possible that some users say it's down on others.
Hey, it works for me. So in that case there was no apparent reason for some reason for some people in Russia for instance it worked some not.
Outside of Russia it was the same thing. On the problem lasted a few hours, three to four hours, which is a very common duration for an internet incident.
Someone told me once that every internet incident is two hours of panic on five minutes to fix it.
So a bit of analysis of the problem now. So I have something terrible to tell you. Don't believe what you read on the web.
A lot of bullshit. Many people don't know what they're talking about. They don't rely on facts. In that case for instance a lot of things are observable on the internet.
Anyone can run a DNS client, can run trace routes, can try with Curl or other software. So it's possible to have data, actual hard data.
But yet some people prefer to immediately start writing anything on the social network rather than collecting data.
So if we collect data we can see that the problem was not with one website or the other. So when people said Yandex is down, no it was not specific to Yandex.
But also there was a specific problem. It was about Russia. Many people immediately started to assume that it had something to do with the war.
That it was an attack by the Ukrainians or a problem with Russia. There is the first problem that many people talk on the social networks without first gathering data.
But there is also another problem is that many people reacted to this event not based on facts but based on whether they were pro-Russian or anti-Russian.
So they said it's a fault of Ukraine, CIA etc. or the opposite or it's a fault of Putin or Kadyrov or I don't know who.
So for instance you can find in many articles published about this problem that it was because of Russian censorship, some censorship test that failed.
There is no evidence supporting this. There is censorship in Russia but in the specific case of the incident on Tuesday there is absolutely zero evidence that it was an attack or zero evidence that it had anything to do with Russian censorship.
It was just a technical problem.
So to debug this sort of problem let me spoil immediately it was a DNSSEC issue. But it was in the title so you already know it.
So the best tool to debug DNSSEC issues if you don't know it is DNSViz.
DNSViz is one of these few programs that are loved both by hardcore hackers and by managers.
Hackers love it because it's technically sound and it produces correct diagnostic.
And managers love it because there are pictures.
Here you can see the chain of cryptographic keys that were used in .ru.
At the top is what is called the key signing key which is one reference from the DNSWoot.
The key signing key signs two other keys which are called the ZSK, the zone signing keys.
One was inactive at this time. It was the old one which was soon to be retired but still published because again the world is not consistent which means that different parts of the internet see different things so you have to keep information in case of.
On the new one the active one on the white well as you see there is a problem.
Red is not because of Russia it's because of problem in that case invalid signatures for all this type of data.
So this was at the heart of the problem.
The zone was signed cryptographically signed but with invalid signatures.
So the issue was at the .ru domain name registry which is the organization in charge of the top level domain .ru.
Unlike what many people said without any facts.
It has nothing to do with the system of resolvers used by the internet access providers in Russia.
The problem appeared for everyone. I had the problem at home for instance because the source of the problem, the root of the problem was at the .ru domain name registry.
Also this registry is the same organization is also in charge of two other top level domains which were unaffected.
Again unlike what you can read in many articles about the problem.
So DNSSEC is a technology of security.
The goal is the idea is to sign cryptographically the DNS data so the resolver at the other end can check that the data is pristine, is correct and has not been modified.
So that the idea is in a way, actually it was even in the official statement by the domain name registry, in a way DNSSEC worked because the signatures were invalid so the resolvers rightly so rejected the signature.
So you cannot see immediately that the signatures were invalid.
You can query DNS with tools like a dig, drill etc. etc.
But of course unless you can do RSA or ECDSSE computations in your head you will not see that the signature is invalid.
You have to trust the software.
So why did it work for some people?
It's because not all DNS resolvers on the earth validate.
I didn't try the resolver used on the first-dem network for instance.
I assume it validates but for instance many big internet access providers don't bother to validate which means that if the signatures are incorrect it doesn't matter because they don't check anyway.
So big public DNS resolvers like Google public DNS validate on the other problem.
Also at home I have my own resolver which validates so I was also unable to see anything under .RU.
But it can explain why some people said hey it works for me.
Sure because every resolver DNS is decentralized which means that any resolver on earth will do its own validation
and some decide that no it's broken so you cannot access it and some will not validate so it will work in a way.
So the lessons we can take from this incident.
One is that DNS is important. I can even say critical.
Most activity on the internet start with the DNS so not having the DNS for most people is like having no internet.
There have been some reports that for instance Russia was disconnected from the internet.
Bullshit. It was easy to see that if you know the IP address of the server you could still reach it.
But of course it's not really convenient. You cannot spend the day using ping and truss route with IP addresses.
So for most users it was exactly as if the internet in Russia was down while it was only a DNS problem.
So DNS is critical. That's why the people who work to maintain the DNS should be paid much more but it's another issue.
Also an important thing about the DNS is that the domain names are organized in a tree with a root.
So you can create top level domain like .fr.be.ru and then second level domains, .yondex.ru etc.
And because of this organization in a tree if you break one node in the tree everything under it is down as well.
So if you break something .com every name under something .com disappears and if you break a TLD, a top level domain, big problem because you break everything underneath.
That's why domain name registries are extremely important.
Also cryptography is hard. We know it. It's hard to do properly. It's hard to debug software as bugs.
I'm sorry again to inform you that software as bugs.
So it's still a problem today that internet could be more robust if we could get rid of security measures
because every security technique can turn into a denial of service.
In the case of .ru many people said oh okay because DNS sec was broken and access was then denied we should get rid of DNS sec.
Okay it's exactly the same if you find an expired certificate on an HTTPS website you decide that checking certificates is a bad idea.
It's the same thing for every security technique. If you lock your door when you leave and if you then lose your keys you cannot go back to your home.
You have a denial of service and then people lock their doors for good reasons.
So it's the same here. It's true that in that case a problem in a security technique made a denial of service
but it doesn't mean that we should get rid of security. Again it's a very general problem with every security technique.
Also one important lesson but you already know that free software is great because in that case without DNS v's debugging such problems would be much harder.
Of course we could use tools like a dig, drill etc but typically they don't make nice reports.
It's not just the pleasure of a nice picture. It's also a good summary and it allows you to see very quickly what was wrong.
Some tools like drill for instance I use drill a lot and drill reported also the bad signature but it reports also many other things so it can be hard to pinpoint the problem.
So DNS v's is really great. It can be used online but it's also free software so you can use it on your own machine if you want.
Also during the problem I used a lot the Wipe at Last probes. There are small probes with free software in it.
Of course that volunteers install all around the world so you can make distributed measurements.
Again the world is not consistent. You can have things that work in one place and fail in another so you need also distributed monitoring of the internet, distributed debugging.
And this is exactly what Wipe at Last probes are producing. The software on the probes is free software but typically you don't mess with it.
The server is not so it's not really free software everywhere but it's quite open because not only anyone can install Wipe at Last probes but anyone can also ask for measurements from the probes.
And they can do everything which is needed to debug DNS and DNS SAC issues.
Thank you. I'll be there if you have questions or issues or you can ask them on the metrics room as well. Thank you.